Today, SEO is facing one of the biggest
shakeups we've seen in years. Between
generative AI, search experience
changes, and how AI chatbots are
evolving, the entire landscape is
undergoing a massive disruption. So, for
this special episode, I wanted to
explore what's really happening in
search right now and where it's all
going. And I can't think of a better
guest than Kevin Indic to discuss this.
Kevin advised some of the fastest
growing companies on the planet. Think
Reddit, Dropbox, Nextdoor, and Snapchat.
He led SEO and growth at companies like
Shopify, G2, and Atlassian. And every
week, over 22,000 marketers rely on his
email newsletter to stay ahead of the
curve. So, in my conversation with
Kevin, we discussed how AI is changing
the world of SEO, what the future might
look like, and most importantly, how to
prepare for this new AI first reality
and not get left behind. But enough with
the intro. Let's roll the episode.
HRE's podcast.
[Music]
>> Kevin, uh, thanks for doing this. Happy
to have you on Href's podcast. Long time
coming
>> and waiting for this.
>> And like I told you, uh, this is not
going to be my typical kind of
interrogation of the guest when I'm
trying to get to the bottom of things
and like challenge them on everything.
But more so like uh I want to catch up
with you because I know that you're like
deeply entrenched in SEO industry. Uh
you are keeping your hand on the pulse
of what's happening with AI, with
search, with everything. And it's almost
like I want to exchange notes with you
like what you're seeing, what I'm
seeing, where we agree, we disagree. So
basically AI and SEO uh would be the
topic of our conversation. Sounds good.
I'm a little relieved cuz in my head I
was mentally preparing for a sparring
session and uh I was getting my my my
soft uh you know uh gloves out. So uh
yeah, let's do it, man.
>> Well, you never know. I might throw a
few jabs here and there.
>> So that's okay. the the two kind of
overarching topics that uh I really
wanted to discuss with you uh is u how
AI is changing a SEO and search kind of
from two directions. From one direction
we have the AI that is integrated into
search with like the AI overviews with
Google AI mode uh yada yada yada. So the
search is changing itself. From the
other uh end we have using AI to do like
marketing and SEO. So I think a good
place to start is actually search how
search is changing. So uh I I posted on
LinkedIn the other day the the crocodile
chart where impressions and clicks are
going uh different ways.
What is your perspective? Is this
something you're seeing across the
board? Is anyone immune to this? like
what is the situation with the
overviews? Let's start from that.
>> I haven't seen anyone immune to this.
Just to take that uh off the front off
the off the top. Um
2024 to me is the peak traffic year. I
think we'll look back at 2024 and we'll
say, man, that was the peak that we the
most traffic that we've ever seen. And
I'm intentionally not saying organic
traffic. I'm saying traffic as a whole
because Google is the biggest traffic
referer still, right? which we'll we'll
bank that for later cuz I think it's an
important point here in the in the
context. Um but yes, clicks are going
down, impressions are going up. It does
seem like the impression increase is
mostly due to the way that Google counts
impressions and positions for AI
overviews, right? So essentially based
on their definition, every URL that is
cited in an AIO view automatically gets
an impression once the AIO view loads
since it's at the top it loads um
basically for every search uh of that
topic or of that keyword better said and
uh even if it only loaded when people
click the load more button of the AI
overview so the expansion um most people
do that right we're going to come back
to the study that I did in a while but
to take that up front as well. Uh we did
a study and we saw that over 85% of
people click the load more button
because they want to see what the rest
of the AI overview says. So that's why
we see this
>> over 85% of people click the load more
on AI overview.
>> Yeah,
>> that's absolutely not my personal
experience. I I never click them.
typically like maybe I'm searching for
different things but for me the the the
the answer that I need for for the kind
of the for the queries where I I would
be satisfied with the IIO view I don't
typically click uh see more so that's
that's an interesting takeaway
>> do you get the kind of answers you're
looking for from the AIO view though
like the before you click on load more
>> oh it depends it's like a very
philosophical question so let's not uh
go into this but uh again to to bring
that uh back a little into kind of
actionable uh things and HF's product
because we are scraping AI overviews
essentially to see like which brands
show up there but if I remember
correctly we don't like our our scraper
or like our data partners who are doing
this they don't click on load more so we
only see the snippet before it
>> uh so it's interesting if 85% of people
are clicking it. But but again, even if
they're clicking doesn't mean they read
it start to finish.
>> Correct? Yes, that's the same thing that
we saw in the study. I'm going to
explain the study in just a second,
right? But to to finish that point, um
we also noticed that the majority of
people, they read the upper third of the
AI overview. And it's the same behavior
that people had before AIO use, right?
They would just read the top of the
search results most of the time. They
skim, right? Don't get me wrong. they
they scan and they skim the whole AIO or
the whole search results page, but they
pay most of their attention on the top
third. So it is most important to be
cited early on or to be mentioned in the
AI view. You're you're correct in that
sense.
>> Okay. Uh so again you are right now kind
of a free agent. You are doing advising
and consulting. So you have multiple
clients uh which we can use as a kind of
a sample size uh to see
what is their kind of attitude to AI
overviews and and loss of traffic. Again
uh may maybe the first question do you
see much correlation and again not even
among your clients but with other people
who you talk to do you see much
correlation between loss of traffic and
loss of revenue because I think it was
Rand Fishkin who published an article uh
traffic down revenue up or something
along those lines actually this is kind
of the same thing that we're seeing at
Hrefs. uh our traffic is going down but
revenue is still climbing so we're still
growing which is very good to to know
but yeah what are you seeing yourself
it's a great call because it's so
important to differentiate between
traffic and revenue across my clients
and some other sites that I have insight
to I'm seeing on average revenue
relatively flat the correlation with the
traffic loss is low some obviously
there's some businesses where it's
incredibly high like publishers, right?
Publishers not in a good place. Now,
>> um affiliates same way.
>> Um
sorry, most such affiliate marketing,
affiliate SEO was such a cheat code in
those like past I know five years that I
I kind of giggle that this is all coming
to an end. It was it was just so easy.
>> It's a tricky one because you know like
some super blackhead affiliates are
making bank right now, right? They're
spamming LM. So there is a you know
there is a kind of piece of the pie that
is still rich. Um and then on the other
hand right there is these interesting
conversations of you know should maybe
OpenAI take an affiliate commission for
products that they sell. I don't want to
veer off too much off but it's it's like
a very you know like sure affiliates
were always the middleman but then
there's also this question like who is
the new middleman and or you know anyway
so affiliates publishers struggling um
SAS companies typically flat to up um
e-commerce not a huge impact from AI
views yet cuz I mean the whole
e-commerce landscape has been changing
before AIO views already um and then
there are marketplaces like consumer
marketplaces or B2B marketplaces at
least what's left of them um and and
their revenue is more slightly down but
still not to the same degree that
traffic is lost. And so that brings us
to like an interesting theory, right? So
either um you know like was a lot of the
top of the funnel content that SEOs
created was that maybe more impactful
than we thought but we were never able
to attribute it um or um are we also
seeing more AI overviews for commercial
queries? I would say probably both right
if I had to give an answer I would say
it's probably both. I think on the one
hand there there were there was a lot of
these like very early user journey
topics like what is blah blah blah or
how to do blah blah blah that is very
basic that maybe had a bit more impact
on the downstream funnel than we thought
but it was just harder to attribute and
at the same time I think that the I
don't have data to prove that yet but I
do think that the the so-called donifa
in German right like the actual number
of how often AI overviews show up goes
goes way beyond what we're able to
measure because people prompt longer
questions. And so I'm saying all of that
because that explains a little bit of
the revenue impact that we're seeing.
There are some companies, especially in
the SAS space, that are actually seeing
higher revenue after the launch of AI
overviews in conjunction with all the
other LLMs because people get better
answers to their questions faster and
they get to a conversion point much much
faster in their journey. But then there
are also other companies that benefited
largely from their size, from their
number of pages um in the old SEO world
that are now struggling because that
same um advantage doesn't really uh um
exist anymore in LMS, at least right
now. It's interesting that you mention
that AIO reviews are starting to show up
for commercial queries. The last time we
checked, and I admit that was I think 3
months ago, the last time we studied uh
the kind of the search intent of
keywords that show AI reviews, it was
99.9%
informational. So like the overwhelming
uh number of keywords that show AI
reviews were informational. So maybe
it's time for us to repeat the study and
see if really like a sizable amount of
commercial queries has crept in. Is like
did did you say someone else's study
along these lines? No, I had this I came
to the same conclusion. Uh I published
this like meta review of all the
available studies in February and I came
to the same conclusion. It's like all
all top of the funnel allformational
keywords. Cool. And then I started in in
March right when Google launched the
March core update. And at the same time
they significantly dialed up AI
overviews you know um we can talk more
about that but at the same time I saw AI
overviews popping up for so many more
queries and I don't have the data about
that yet but a lot of comparison queries
a lot of where to buy type of queries
right so I think a bit of this is also
how do we define commercial queries um
but um yeah man I think I think this
cuts deeper into commercial and
transactional than what we're able to
measure right now. And I'm very keen for
kind of the next study to see if that's
true or not.
>> Yeah, interesting. We need to check. By
the way, uh in our brand radar tool, uh
we have an index of AI overviews. And if
you do an empty search, it would show
you basically the graph of how many
keywords we see AI overviews for. So
people can kind of track how Google is
rolling out AI overviews and even change
countries. Uh which is very handy handy
to understand like what's the situation.
So my question about that, sorry to
recruit you. Just just a quick question
about this. Um,
>> how like is there a cuto off of the
number of terms in a prompt or query
that you measure? In other words, are
you able to measure like 30word prompts
and longer?
>> No, no, no. For for AI reviews, it's
simple. We use the same keyword database
that we use for site explorer. So all
the same keywords that we show you that
websites are ranking for uh we just pull
AI overviews for them and create a
separate database. So it's like it's a
very very simple concept but not that
easy kind of to replicate. This is why
you don't see uh any other tools
introducing anything like that. So yeah
uh again this is like a whole different
conversation in terms of AI visibility
and how do you know that these are the
actual prompts and if you need the
actual prompts this is out of scope of
our today's conversation maybe we can do
round two and talk about AI visibility
>> but yeah speaking still about AI
visibility uh in regards to AI reviews
we have like two questions left to
tackle uh first of of all
is it useful to show up in those AI
views like as a brand as a product or
whatever and second how how do you show
up in Google's AI views so what do you
have uh along these lines sorry for
interrupting the interview but I have a
very quick announcement to make this
October we're bringing Hrefs Evolve our
2-day marketing conference to sunny San
Diego and Kevin Indig is actually one of
our speakers at this event so if you're
enjoying our conversation so far
consider getting ticket to HFS Evolve in
San Diego where you'll get a chance to
meet Kevin and maybe even ask him a
bunch of your own questions. Go to our
website at hrefs evvolve.com to see more
details about the event and get your
ticket. Again, it's hrefs evolve.com
this October in San Diego. Now, back to
the episode. So, to answer number one,
we don't know.
>> We don't know. Um there are cases here
and there that show a benefit. Um, but I
will also say it's still tricky to
track, right? What what's often
forgotten is that Google changes AIO
views so so much. And so the way that I
think about them as a SER feature or as
a product in Google search is that it's
it's it's very nent. It's very young.
Google is still adjusting all the time.
As soon as a Gemini model update comes
out, it also impacts AI overviews,
right? And so the noise factor is
incredibly high which makes it very hard
to consistently measure. Right? I often
get into these conversations where we
see data um about AI overuse visibility
and then you know somebody would go out
and and like you know Google it
themselves quote unquote and then see
something different. And so it's very
hard you know to to get the accuracy
right for AIO views. And a large part is
because Google changes them all the time
and refineses them and works on them and
all that kind of stuff. Um so any case
study that says we saw this 10 20 30%
uplift in citations and AIO views and we
saw a bottom line impact you have to be
careful with that um they exist and
they're very rare still because
>> they exist I didn't I didn't see any any
such uh case study
>> nothing public uh but there are
companies that are you know that are
they're they're kind of seeing that data
in their dashboards and they see some
impact on the bottom line but again
incredibly hard to measure. Not just
because the AIO data is tricky, but also
because since we're getting fewer and
fewer clicks, a big piece of the impact
needs to come through self-s serve
attribution. Basically asking people
when they sign up, how have you heard
about us?
>> They would just say Google.
>> Yeah, they would just say Google, right?
And so and if they remember, right, they
a lot of times, you know, they might not
remember where they first first saw you.
So super hard to cleanly attribute and
measure that to an increase. Now second
question uh how do you grow your
coverage and AI use? Um a lot of that is
in the most simple way to give the most
relevant and and best answer. And so
that is a much harder concept when we're
talking about shorthad keywords. Right?
So when when somebody's looking for
example for what's the best the best SEO
keyword rank tracker, right? Um or or
maybe just best SEO tool, right? That is
a shorthand keyword. Very hard to say
what people really want. When somebody
searches on the other hand for, you
know, best rank tracker for uh five
people company in the legal space under
$200 a month. much more specific, much
easier to get to do understand what the
best answer looks like in this case. And
so we have to differentiate here between
um what types of keywords and prompts
are we actually targeting with AI
overviews and the more specific the
prompt is that we're targeting, the
easier it is to understand what a good
answer looks like and the easier it is
to then create content or update your
content to appear in AI overviews. So to
bring that to a tactical point, right,
it's about content freshness, content
relevance, like how closely do you match
what people are actually prompting or
looking for? It's about brand authority
and trust. Do people actually have they
heard about you when they see your
brand? What sentiment do they have about
your brand? Um and um u number four
might be um factors like you know soft
factors like your domain or URL or
snippet does it communicate that you are
especially relevant for this case. But
these three other factors trust um
freshness and relevance are in my mind
the the main ingredients to bake the
cake.
>> Sounds uh eerily similar to how we used
to do SEO in the past. uh decade
basically all the kind of all the first
principles apply
>> the first principles apply and so this
is what I think is missing from the big
discussion between you know uh go LM O
AISO AO like going to list all the
acronyms right I'm going to send it to
the show notes um but you know like is
this new or is this just good SEO and
the answer is yes right the the core
tactics and principles apply I they
apply they apply with um you know um at
a much much higher rate AI accelerates
all of that makes it basically more
important to be good in these things and
also search behavior changes right so in
order for you to be successful in AI
search you know it it there's more
dimensions and layers to this it's not
just what you do it's also what users
are doing and so right now the biggest
difference that I see between AI Search
optimization and classic SEO is not what
we do as SEOs. It's what users are
doing. They're changing the behavior.
They're searching longer prompts because
for two decades, Google longtail search
was not good. Instead, swear word here.
And uh and now all of a sudden it's
getting really good because LM's pick up
on user intent so much better, right?
And so they're changing what they're
doing. And on the other side of the
search marketplace, you have content
inventory that again for two decades was
trained on optimizing for shorthad
keywords. And now there is a big gap, a
vacuum of hyper specific content that
targets these hypers specific questions
that people have.
Uh first of all, I I made a note of
something you said that uh Google is
often changing AI overviews. So like if
you search for kind of exactly the same
thing which people are still doing a lot
of queries are still kind of three four
five words and people are saying the
same thing or even you might ask the
same thing with six or seven words but
adding those like one or two extra words
doesn't really change much for the
context of what what you're hoping to
get. So you might think that it makes
sense for Google to save some
computational resources and cache those
AI overviews. It just makes sense. Like
the other day we we did a very odd
experiment at HF's blog where we wanted
to test kind of uh AI TLDDR blog like uh
don't read like which is stupid in a way
like don't read the article. Here's like
a quick recap by AI. We did generate the
recap with AI uh but we didn't generate
it on the fly. So we we we made a block
we even kind of uh did like a fancy
animation. So when you load an article
it it something something is kind of
loading and then the AI snippet expands
so that to give people an impression oh
AI has generated this for me. But this
was not like generated on the fly. This
was cached and uh included uh in the
page. So I would think that it makes
sense for uh Google to also cache their
AI overviews for popular queries because
if you need to do the same thing over
and over again uh why would you need to
generate it every time? And this gives
me an idea of yet another research that
we could do. We could just track like a
couple I don't know thousand or I know a
million queries and see how much change
of the text of AI overview uh we see
over time. Uh, and this is where we can
also test if uh Ryan Law, our head of
content, and Patrick Stalks, our
technical SEO wizard, are watching HF's
podcast episodes because it would be up
to them to to do this research and
publish it on HF's blog. But yeah, that
being said,
yes, it makes sense to cache your uh AI
overview and not do compute every single
time someone searches for this. But we
also know that the search results
themselves are volatile. So the same
page wouldn't rank number three like
today and tomorrow and the day after
tomorrow. Google kind of switches them
uh all the time which means that they
can also pull information from different
pages and maybe they have ways to test
if people are satisfied with AI overview
that's generated from these three pages
or AI overview that is generated from
these five pages.
So maybe they're running those tests and
identifying which kind of AI answer
satisfies people uh the most. So that is
very interesting. Have you seen any any
studies of like how often Google changes
AI reviews?
>> I've seen something but I don't have the
data top of mind. Um I think they're
changing relatively often. Uh but I I
would have to look at the data to give
you a specific answer. By the way, um I
would be very um
excited to see such a feature in the
Href's product. So, not just showing how
many AI overviews appear for your
keywords, but how often do they change?
What's the change rate
>> might be hard to compute? Um but some
some like noise factor because what I've
what I've seen anecdotally in my
experience is that it's very similar to
keywords, right? So in the classic
keywords um we know that the stat like
you know Google sees 15% new queries
every day because things change blah
blah blah. Um and so what I've often
seen is that in in the first couple
weeks that Google sees a new query it's
very hard for Google to understand the
exact user intent. They need to send
more traffic to the query blah blah blah
and then over time the results become
much more stable because Google
understands what people want. I'm seeing
the same thing anecdotally in AI
overviews. Um the challenge is that
again people's prompts are getting so
long that we don't have that um that
much traffic for these prompts anymore.
And so you know Google needs to rethink
um when a prompt like is is successfully
answered or satisfied by an AI overview
without relying on that much traffic.
And you sure you can do things like you
know do people do follow-up searches? Do
they click on the load more? Do they
click on a citation? Like Google can
track all that stuff. We know but the
dynamics change a little bit. Uh and so
um in the same sense I I still expect
that you know as as prompts relate to a
topic that Google knows better the
change rate calms down. It goes down. Um
but new prompts that Google hasn't seen
before AIOS might change by the hour or
at least by the day. By the way, it's
also funny that you know I I I I do
agree that long-term Google needs to
cash more and at the same time I don't
think like I think right now cost
optimization of AI search is mostly an
investor story because you know like
they they surai said that they decrease
cost by 90%. However, you know, whatever
that means. Um, but on the one hand, you
know, um, you you cannot be like people
are concerned about how much it costs
for Google to compute an AIO answer or
AIO. And on the other hand, they're
spending hundreds of billions in capital
expenditure on data centers and cloud
infrastructure and all that other kind
of stuff, right? So, I don't think this
is the time for cost optimization. I
think Google needs to fend off chatt as
a as a challenger and uh and kind of
stabilize the business in that sense um
or the product if you will and so I
don't think cost optimization is top of
mind unless it comes to quarterly
earning calls maybe.
>> Yeah, won't argue with that. But since
you mentioned the length of the prompts
and you you you keep you you keep
calling search queries prompts, I I want
to do like a very short philosophical
detour and uh
kind of ask at which point a search
query becomes a task for AI. So like the
difference between searching for
something when you actually like want to
find I know a piece of information, a
product, a solution to a problem versus
when you need AI to do something. And I
think the the more words there are in
your search query or like a prompt, the
more it would steer towards the
direction when you are asking AI to like
do something for you rather than you
want to find something, go to the
website and make a transaction. So in in
my mind all these searches that existed
before they will stay because in many
cases when I'm on my phone and I need
like some some kind of information or
some product or like check if if the
restaurant is available I don't want to
write 20 word again we know that web is
increasingly mobile right Google has
this mobile first indexing because they
optimize uh all the everything should be
optimized for phones because people
spend a lot more time on their phones
than on their computers. If we're
talking about old people in in general
and typing on your phone, you don't
write articles on your phone. Maybe
someone does, but I I I never do this.
So, I don't I I think the the vast
majority of searches how they where
they're going to stay. It's just like AI
unlocks a new way to kind of to use a
search engine. You can you can ask it
for something more than just doing a
search.
Philosophically, every search is part of
an action, right? Um, not the action of
searching, but because you're searching
to take action, right? The majority of
times when you search, it's just a piece
of the puzzle because you want to
accomplish something. It's buying a
product. It's learning a skill or
figuring out information to, you know,
maybe I don't know whatever the whatever
you want to do with that information.
And so what we're seeing now is that
there is some data that came out saying
that 30 to 40% of prompts in LMS are
generative, right? So they are about
people taking a specific action like
create this spreadsheet, draw this
image, etc. And that fluctuates over
time as the capabilities of LMS grow. Uh
you probably remember this studio gibli
trend where everybody you know created a
picture of the giblified version that
all of a sudden generative tasks spike
through the roof right it was so bad
that the openi data center commercial
value for for any business in those
prompts
>> yes that is maybe LinkedIn I don't know
um but uh
>> but uh you know like that is a general
task and so I think what's important to
understand here is that
All searches trend towards take an
action. The question is just how quickly
do you get there? And now with AI,
whether it's as an AIO or AI mode on
Google or CHP, perplexity clots, Gemini,
all these LLMs, right? There the
ultimate goal is for you to take action
faster and better. Um, some of these
things you can do in the interface right
away like again spreadsheets, images,
etc. And then other things just guide
you to take the action.
I think that's important to understand
because it means that you know on the
one hand it means that if you still get
traffic you better figure out how they
can take action on your site instead of
like just giving more content. Content
is just the means to learning. It's not
the end, right? People don't read blog
articles because they want to read blog
articles. They read block articles
because they want to do some stuff. So
we need to figure out how to make
experiences more interactive beyond just
text but for people to take action.
Otherwise they go to an LM and take it
um you know at some point. Two the
question is in all these generative
tasks is there a point at which people
need information. So if you want to for
example let's just say you want to
create an image for your LinkedIn
profile header and you go to chat and
you say these are the dimensions now
this is what I want to see uh created
there. Is there going to be a point at
which you maybe do anformational search
about what's the impact of actually
having an optimized LinkedIn header?
Right? So I think it's important for us
that in this whole conversation about
generative intent and tasks that people
do to first of all acknowledge that this
can be very volatile over time. It's
very dependent on the capabilities of
LLMs. Two, every search is a task down
the line. So how can we short that on
shortcut that on our sites? And then
three, um,
what information is connected to
specific tasks that people are taking
and can you provide that information on
your site so that you're visible when
people take that action.
>> Okay, that that's enough of uh the
detour uh into philosophical area. Let's
go back to uh ranking in AI or reviews.
So you you you touched on all those like
first principles of SEO, but since we
were discussing
that AI views are can be pulled from
multiple pages and those are not just
the pages of your website and we also
discussed that like every time Google
creates a new AI overview for a given
query they can vary or vary what's
what's the right pronunciation uh which
pages they take this information from it
seems that kind of the missing piece
like or the added piece to what SEO
professionals have been doing or no
again this was like uh digital PR
getting links getting mentions has
always been the case for SEO
professionals it's just I think you you
want to have kind of more control
over what people say about you on their
websites like is the information recent
factual
uh yada yada yada and how many of these
websites are talking about you and
what's the authority of these websites
are talking about you. So it feels that
these things are becoming increasingly
more important
maybe even more important than your own
website uh because again you you can say
you can pretend to be anyone on your
website but can anyone else corroborate
that? So it feels that the the major
shift of how AI is changing the search
game is that you need to care more about
what other other websites are saying
about you. What do you think?
>> I think there's an argument to be made
that that was always the case. And I do
agree with you though. I think both is
true, right? This was always the case
and now it's even more important. Um and
I've I've seen this in this study that
we performed. So, let me just explain
this study real quick because I keep
coming back to it. Um, I partnered up
with uh uh with Eric um Venbuskerk on
conducting a usability study for AI
overviews. Um took a lot of effort. Uh
six people worked on this. It cost a
small car. Uh was uh you know thankfully
sponsored by Zofu and Du follow. I hope
that's okay that I mentioned this. Um
and uh it created like 30 hours of video
material, 125,000 of words of
transcript. very in-depth and what we
did is we tracked 70 participants in the
US across different age ranges and
different devices when solving eight
tasks on Google. Um, eight tasks because
we wanted to cover different user
intents like find a tax accountant in
your area, find this information about
this medical issue, buy earplugs under
$15, etc. And I would say the the
learnings have fundamentally changed the
way that I look at SEO because one of
the learnings is that
people
generally like and believe AI overviews
and they also really like to validate
that AI answer on platforms like Reddit,
YouTube and other forums. Right? So in
that sense it's absolutely true that
it's more important to to see and try to
influence what other platforms are
saying about you um because people use
them in tandem with Google search and
especially AI answers right so it's
almost like a verification check where
they're like ah this seems to be true
but I'd rather see if another quote
unquote human or unbiased
source says the same thing source can be
again Reddit YouTube forums but also
Trustpilot, G2, right? Review platforms.
It can be Google like Google maps. So
people really care about reviews and
opinions from other humans to influence
their decisions that are already largely
influenced by AI answers.
Okay. Uh let's let's shift gears a
little bit and uh
I want to hear your answer about the
question or in some cases a statement
that people are starting to throw around
every time some change happens in the
SEO industry and that is that SEO is
dead. So stick a fork in it. SEO is
dead. AI has disrupted it. Uh things
will never be the same. Blah blah blah.
But other than just uh getting your kind
of comments and impression on the whole
uh SEO is dead narrative, I want to ask
you like what are you seeing among your
clients? How are they approaching SEO?
Because I remember when I was talking to
a lot of different kind of businesses,
startups,
many of them were kind of avoiding SEO
because because it's slow. Uh it takes
like months, sometimes years to to bring
you good results as opposed to ads where
you can get clicks immediately or it is
like too technical and you need to like
hire like very expensive people to to
get it going blah blah blah. So I know
that people like businesses and startups
only already had their kind of
reservations as to why they don't want
to invest in SEO and now that we see
traffic is going down AI answers blah
blah blah what are you seeing is SEO
dead this time
I think SEO died many times right uh if
you will and it kind of revitalized over
and over again um so
I I want to I want to draw a different
viewoint point of this um which is in
the minds of leadership right CMOs CEOs
COOS uh chief revenue offers off
officers etc um they see a a 30%
structural decline of web traffic and in
their minds SEO might not be dead but
it's probably close to being in a coma
right so it's very hard to go back to
somebody who sees that number and then
say oh no SEO is fine like we're okay
unless you can prove it with revenue
data right? That happens. I see some of
my clients where they're like, "Oh, the
traffic is down, but revenue is up, so
cool. We're we're we keep doing this,
right?" Um, but it's it's very important
to understand that the like what the
investors into SEO think and as SEOs, at
least on the in-house side, right? I'm
not not talking about like independent
site owners, uh, merchants, uh,
affiliates, all that kind of stuff. For
them, SEO might be well on life, right?
I'm talking more about like enterprise
companies um or larger companies, right?
Maybe post series C or D if I had to uh
uh draw a line here. Um so for them
leadership sees that okay SEO is
definitely in decline at least the
traditional form of SEO. So they all ask
themselves the same question which is
what is next like what comes after and I
would say the majority of them see AI/AI
surge as the next thing. So everybody's
hungry to invest. Everybody asks like
without a without a um exception,
everybody that who I work with or uh
sites that I'm that I'm seeing from from
you know from the inside, they're all
asking cool how can we be more visible
in Chachipity and Co. because they all
understand that there could be a
potential first mover advantage and I
would say in some cases that's true. um
we can talk a bit more about like you
know like you know how much classic
influ SEO influences uh LM visibility
etc but um they all smell a first mover
advantage they're all very keen to
invest all of a sudden budgets are
opening right and and people in
companies are willing to invest and at
the same time um I think there is a
window in which you need to prove that
out or these budgets are going to dry up
right so I don't know How long that
window is open? Could be another year,
could be another 18 months, um could be
6 months. But at some point, right, this
invest like the investors into new
software and maybe content and marketing
campaigns, they will want to see what
the returns are. And as we all know,
like or have seen based on the data, AI
traffic converts at a much much higher
or better rate than organic traffic and
it's also still very small, right? So
all these companies, all all this
excitement is an investment in the
future with an implied expectation that
this AI traffic grows to a meaningful
size and hopefully at some point either
comes on top of what's left of classic
organic search from Google or adds even
more. I've seen for the first time last
week a chart of a company where you have
the um the the the bottom line from SEO
uh or classic SEO Google um and a line
with um bottom line from CHBT and they
cross in the middle. It looks like an X.
That's the first time I've ever seen
this and it's very encouraging. It's a
smaller company, right? So you have to
take that into account. But slowly there
are these cases but for the broad
average I mean you know LM conversions
make up maybe between one and 10% of the
organic bottom line. So it's not it's
not meaningful yet.
I really really like your perspective.
So basically AI is not killing SEO. It's
creating a whole new cycle. And this
cycle starts pretty much from hype and
fear of missing out where everyone wants
to jump on this train while you can
still jump on this train while it's not
yet moving too fast. And I guess this
explains because when when all of these
changes to to search were rolling out
and we we started seeing like loss of
traffic across the board, I was worried
for the fate of HF's revenue to be
honest with you because like we we tied
ourselves uh so uh close with the SEO
industry in in all those years. I I was
thinking and and yet again I was seeing
some people saying, "Oh, like we're
losing clients of our SEO agency on on
Twitter, blah blah blah blah blah." But
what you're saying makes a lot of sense
because a lot of people understand that
it might so happen that those chat bots
are essentially the search engines of
the future and people will keep
searching. People do need to find
information. People do need to uh look
for solutions to their problems. So
someone is going to fill that gap. If
it's not kind of traditional search 10
blue links where when you need to land
on the website, there could be something
else AI answer that that gives you the
information and then again you you go
straight to the website with a purchase
intent like you say the the AI traffic
converts a lot better because in a way
chatbot has done the job of persuading
the person that this is the thing you
need just go and buy it don't waste any
more time. So it actually makes a lot of
sense and this is very optimistic and
reassuring and yeah like I said it
explains why HF's own revenue uh we had
a few pretty good months I can tell you
uh and I guess that's that's thanks to
all the kind of AI related things we
were releasing because people are really
hungry for for that information for
their AI visibility for understanding
how to how to rank in uh uh chat GPT
answers and uh other uh chatbot answers.
That being said, we we discussed quite a
bit how to kind of get your brand into
AI overviews and how to get kind of a
citation uh in in AI overview. Uh is
there any difference between what we
discussed for Google AI overview and uh
ranking in in chat GPT?
>> Yes, showing up in chat GPT.
>> Totally. Totally. And I I do want to
say, you know, about the like disruption
and hype and stuff, uh, one mantra that
I'm holding mentally up for myself is
it's it it's never as bad as it seems
and it's never as good as it seems, you
know? So, I think things have a funny
way of playing out down the middle, you
know? It's never fully dystopian, never
fully utopian, right? It kind of comes
out in the middle. Uh, so I think the
same is true here in this kind of
disruption. there is absolutely
something to it and the world doesn't
change tomorrow you know like this is a
small gradual change like there's you
know billions of Google users and some
of them especially the older you get
this is again from this study that I did
the older you are the more um you know
um uh kind of uh the less receptive you
are to AI answers right the more you
stick to the classic results so a lot of
nuance here in this conversation but to
give you a specific answer. Um, there is
a significant difference between
appearing or better said between the
impact of your SEO performance on Google
and how you appear on Chat GPT. So, we
know that LM lean heavily on search
engines like Bing and Google to ground
their answers. So there is of course a
carryover effect but I've looked at the
data and what I've seen is that in some
industries the same winners on Google
are also the winners on chat GPT. A
classic example is CRM software right um
you only have maybe three big CRM
software vendors. I mean you could argue
you have a long tail of smaller ones.
Yes, but the market is dominated by
three big ones. Uh mainly Salesforce and
HubSpot. Um, and those are obviously the
most visible ones on Google. They're
also the most visible ones on CHP. That
is a very consolidated market or
industry. The more fragmented markets
and industries, there is a completely
different game. The same winners on
Google are not the same winners in CHP.
Uh, and part of it is because I mean
there's different reasons for that. I've
seen sites that accidentally block LLMs,
right? So, they're opening the door for
challengers or or other contenders to
come in and and be visible. Um, uh, some
of them just, you know, have kind of a
very old school approach to, uh, to SEO
that doesn't translate well to LLM. So,
there's all sorts of reasons for why in
fragmented markets, the winner on Google
are not the winners on, uh, CHBT, but
we're seeing that e-commerce is a good
example. Uh, some SAS industries are
good examples. And so I think at the
very least it's critical to monitor how
you appear, how visible you are in LM
mainly CHP like it's it's mostly it's
like 80% chip really when it comes to uh
what matters right now. Um, and so I
think at the very least you want to
validate that you dominate your, you
know, market so to say the same way on
Chat GPT as you do on Google because
it's not always true. And if it's not,
we we already have the tools to kind of
reverse engineer what creates visibility
for your competitors. Is it specific
pieces of content that you don't have?
Is it specific um stats or data that
they have that you don't? Is it a
specific brand reputation and sentiment?
So, the tools are already good enough to
help you reverse engineer why somebody
else is more visible or less visible
than you in LMS. But at the very least,
I think everybody should check that for
themselves.
>> Yeah. Uh, exactly. This is why we're
putting so much effort into our brand
raider tool because it does exactly
that. It it pulls all the uh prompts
where your brand is being mentioned,
pulls all the citations so you can
analyze that for yourself. you can
analyze it for competitors and you can
actually go to the actual pages and
websites that LLMs are pulling their
information from and make sure that
you're being well represented there. And
actually I think uh Patrick Stokes on
our team did a pretty cool study where
he again using brand raider data he
analyzed the top websites where LLMs are
pulling their citations from and he
identified a bunch of biases. I think
for example like Google was uh biased
towards information from Reddit. They
were often like pulling stuff from
Reddit. I think Perplexity was biased
towards Wikipedia or something. So yeah,
uh people if they're interested, they
can look it up on a chef's blog. Uh
pretty cool, pretty cool research by
Patrick Sts.
>> It's important. Hey, it's really
important because that's another piece
of like how this AI search world is
slightly different than the classic
Google world because as you mentioned in
the beginning, you know, we cannot just
focus on our own websites anymore. We
need to focus on other platforms too and
the mix and prioritization depends on
the model that we're looking at, right?
So, we know that Google and Gemini, they
love, for example, Reddit. Sure. Uh a
part of that is also the case for CHPT,
but CHPT might lean on Wikipedia much
much more, right? Or in other platforms.
So now the question is cool how are you
portray how are you portrayed on
Wikipedia? What are ways that you can
influence that or shape that experience?
So um in that sense SEO has become much
more multi- channelannel or
multiplatform
um and way beyond just mentions and
backlinks also in a sense that there's a
different mix of sources that LM are
pulling from. I'm smiling because uh
Wikipedia editors are probably bracing
for all the SEO spammers that are now
like running their way.
>> Spam's back, baby. It's back well in
life.
>> We'll see what happens with all those
websites that LLMs re rely that much for
information. Okay. Uh I I like our
takeaway. I I fully agree with it. SEO
is not dead. Uh it's just like a new
cycle. uh people will keep searching and
first principles apply. Uh there would
be a few changes that you need to make
but fundamentally
you can apply a lot of the skill set
that you've gained in the past decade to
to this new era uh with just little uh
adaptation. Let's talk about now using
AI. So, uh, we don't have much time, uh,
in this podcast episode to go into this,
but still I would love to know with with
again with all the hype like you're not
going to be replaced with AI, you're
going to be replaced with people who
know how to use AI, yada yada yada. And
I've seen you publish some AI workflows
that was that folks from a AI ops or
like what was the tool that uh, Arabs?
>> AOPS. AOPS. Yeah, they created some some
workflows based on your kind of
methodologies. So, what are like what
are the kind of best uses of AI
for SEO and digital marketing that you
saw? I know give me your top three. What
are the like top three things that if
people are not implementing or if not
looking to implement, they are kind of
falling behind? I love that you asked
that question, Tim, because
as you said, AI goes both ways. And I
don't I'm not sure if most people are
aware of this, but there is this implied
battle or race. Race is maybe a better
word. there's this implied race between
marketers who are now becoming like
incredibly powerful because of AI and
LMS and search which is becoming crazy
powerful because of AI and I'm not sure
like you know right now it seems to me
that we we might be winning this race
and we're we're maybe able to influence
LLM results and search results to much
much higher level than LLMs and search
engines can filter
Right. So to make them more tangible, um
my
principal approach here is that
LM and models are not yet good enough to
replace a whole workflow. A workflow
could be keyword research. It could be
updating content. It could be creating
that new content. It could be a
technical audit. LMS are not yet good
enough to do all of that. But LMS are
good enough yet or tools like like
Arabops that we spoke about, they're
good enough to replace steps or to
automate steps of these workflows. And
so my approach is to codify
the most important workflows for a
company. So if you're not a marketplace,
then it's probably some sort of content
generation. Let's just say block article
generation, even though there's
obviously way more than just blocks. Um
so you have a you you write down the
step by step that happens from you know
ideation of a blog article or
identifying that you want to write about
a topic to publishing the article and
then you see which of these steps is the
bottleneck. Maybe it's creating the
draft. Maybe it's editing the piece.
Maybe it's inserting it into this mess.
>> Kevin time to interrupt you and throw
that jab you were uh looking for uh for
so long. Let's let's not talk about kind
of generals and hypotheticals. I want to
know something specific that I don't
know you're using personally or that you
see anyone using personally that is kind
of blowing you away outside of going to
chat GPT and saying I don't know give me
five titles for my article or help me
improve something or blah blah blah.
Something really impressive that is not
just like a question to chat GPT.
>> Cool. Okay. Look, um, ramp.com, right?
Uh, probably one of the most or the
fastest fintech company in history just
raised at a $16 billion valuation. I
worked with ramp for a whole year,
integrated into the growth team. And
something that we did is we took
conversations between prospects that
turn to customers and the sales team. We
transcribed these conversations and we
used an AI tool uh Humata AI I'm sure I
can mention it um to analyze these
transcripts. I think we started with 50
and we asked questions like um what are
the problems that customers are facing?
Uh what are the solutions that are that
they're using right now? Who else are
they looking at? What are they trying to
achieve? What does success look like?
Blah blah blah. these questions. We used
AI to identify the answers from all
these conversations and then we created
blog articles that converted at a much
much higher rate because we knew that
our target audience deals with these
questions and we never even looked for
the search volume about this. And the
beauty of AI is that we're able to now
analyze many conversations. I mean you
can look into hundreds of conversations
to identify from a first principle what
topics people really care about and then
create content about them. That is one
very specific example and you can you
can check the performance of the of the
blog and hrefs. Uh
>> can I give you a little bit of uh a
little bit of push back on this?
>> Sure.
>> So so the push back would be is
who is the source of let's call them
conversion triggers. who is the source
of uh kind of solid arguments that
persuade people to buy. I would say that
it's kind of like a marketing and
product department. So, so you you like
this is this is what uh the term sales
enablement means. It's like you take all
the information on what makes your
product awesome and you give it to sales
so that sales what so that sales knew
what to talk to people. Sales are not
product experts. they need to be
educated on the product. And it seems
that when you're analyzing sales calls
and want to create uh content that would
persuade people to buy, it seems like
you're flipping this the script. You're
putting sales as people who know your
product well and know like what works on
customers like who is creating sales
enablement material. It's kind of like
uh closed closed loop here and you don't
know where this loop starts like what is
the the first source of information who
is giving those like conversion triggers
in the first place. Yeah, I I I can
totally see how you can have like I know
at HFS we have multiple tools, we have
multiple features, we have multiple use
cases. uh you give all that to sales and
then you analyze sales calls and they're
telling you oh like I don't know uh chat
GPT index in brand raider is the best uh
but we also see this with subscriptions
so we don't need to use AI to analyze
sales calls we're just seeing what
converts kind of like this so uh what
would you say to this
>> well I would expect that sales people
know the product as well maybe not as
deep as a like a product person but they
should know it um however the the the
key here is to look at the conversations
of prospects that turn to customers
because not all prospects turn to
customers, right? Some of them maybe the
price is too high or they don't believe
that the product is good enough, right?
So filtering out the conversations you
look at by the by the successful ones,
that is a key to make sure that you also
have the conversations where you know
the salesperson was able to quote
unquote convince or or help the person
buy the product.
>> Okay. Okay. uh any other use case that
that is I I must say that that makes
sense that's pretty cool use AI to
analyze uh uh sales conversations at
scale and this is I believe like we
don't use gong ourselves but I believe
gong has this kinds of this kind of
functionality because they automatically
analyze all the sales calls you have and
you can easily search whenever people
mention your competitors you can search
for any objection and it would give you
all the sales calls uh this is very cool
but to be honest I see this as uh you
have to use AI as a marketer. It's like
you have to be up to date with like
what's possible like and if you know
that the tool like Gong exists and this
has and it has this functionality and
you're not using it, you're you're
silly. Like like I what I don't like
about the whole kind of you're going to
lose your job to someone who knows how
to use AI is it smells like some secret
sauce to me. While when I try to talk to
people, I'm not saying secret sauce. I'm
saying, "Oh, like use gong." Oh, really?
I like I'm doing this. I'm doing this
like give me the the secret AI sauce.
>> But look, I I will say I mean Gong
Chorus, right? They all do this. I will
say that
almost nobody who I talk to actually
listens to customer conversations,
right? SEOs have for such a long time
just done keyword research by search
volume. maybe a slightly more refined
approach, but nobody's listening to
customers. And the reason is because for
the last two decades, marketing was
quantified, right? Performance marketing
works incredibly well. So marketers stop
talking to customers. Nobody does that
actually. So the the the first key is
like going back because when you
identify a topic that you know is
important for your target audience and
maybe it doesn't have search volume,
right? maybe nobody else goes after
this, right? You're going to be the only
source of knowledge for a lot of these
topics, right? So, and and people will
look from the outside with SEO tools on
your website like, why are they going
after this stuff? Why are they not
getting organic traffic? But on the
inside, you're laughing cuz you're
seeing that traffic is going up and
conversions are going up, right? So,
there is a bit of a competitive
advantage part here. Now, the secret
source thing is again um automating
workflows like content generation to a
large part. Okay, let's go to the second
use case. I don't think we'll have time
for three, but we we uh discussed one.
When you use AI to analyze sales calls
at scale and then you use that to
identify like conversion triggers,
identify uh objection handling, things
like that, and you create great content
that kind of does it on autopilot
without sales needing to talk to people.
Uh counted. Uh give give me something
else.
>> Cool. Um the second thing we we already
spoke about this but like providing an
interactive tool or experience on top of
just text right so um
>> now nowadays with vibe coding which you
know everybody before you freak out I
know people like ah vip coding vip
marketing this all BS um but nowadays
reality is you can create little tools
very very quickly with solutions like v
0ero lovable right uh uh cursor etc um
to make your content more more
interactive with generators,
calculators, quizzes, uh little apps,
right? Widgets. I think that's a
critical part. Marketers can now use AI
tools to build a proof of concept,
validate that this works and is
important. And then hand it over to an
actual developer team who does this the
right way, right? Like I'm not technical
enough to build these tools in like
production ready, but I'm good enough to
prove the concept out with something
that just works, right? Like an MVP type
of thing. Very underrated um but hugely
effective. I've seen I mean you can like
look at some of the websites of the
companies that I work with and you'll
see some of these uh widgets or tools uh
across a lot of their pages. big impact
not just on the engagement with the
content therefore the poor performance
of the content but also the conversion
rates right so something very tactically
that you can do now is you can have for
example a calculator on a standalone
landing page but you can also embed that
calculator in your blog content or your
content hubs and then provide a better
experience improve conversion blah blah
blah right you can you can be very
creative with how you build
>> if you get any traffic to your website
to start with
>> yeah of course
requirement it is to get any traffic.
Right? So that that is number two that I
would say is kind of a thoughtful
approach to bip coding and we maybe just
need a different word for this.
>> Uh I agree that's that's a cool use case
but I'll give you a bit of push back as
well. Uh and this push back is grounded
uh in what's happening at HF's marketing
department. So um I was pushing uh
Dimmitri to give marketing department a
dedicated developer for quite a few
years just to like uh as you say vibe
code uh whatever marketing department
wants like those small kind of mini
tools some of them silly some of them
useful whatever we need like kind of if
if marketers have a development resource
and they're able to do something more
than write words and create images and
do landing pages is that always leads to
something cool and uh only when kind of
VIP coding became available and uh
creating those little tools that don't
necessarily need to be production ready
but rather proof of concept has become
like magnitudes easier and fast.
Dimmitri officially gave the marketing
department our own developer kind of
vibe coder a person who is actually good
at development. Uh but his job would be
to vibe code different ideas that
marketers have like you say of like mini
tools automating workflows and stuff
like this. Why? Because
I I understand that vibe coding is going
forward and you can explain in plain
English to AI what you want to build and
it would build it for you. But still
from from the experience that I'm seeing
from from the feedback of the people who
actually use it, if you're not a
developer,
there's a high likelihood that you're
going to uh waste a lot of time and get
stuck.
>> If you are a developer,
you're not going to get stuck. You will
identify, you will tell AI like what to
do. It would fix it for you and you'll
have uh the result in like 10 times
faster uh than it was. So in a way I
agree with you AI unlocks and again
there's there's a middle ground there's
a middle ground there's a case of Ryan
Law our director of content who actually
went took some Python co courses uh
taught himself uh the basics of coding
and now he's legit good using AI to
create kind of scripts codes because he
has this background he spent time kind
of learning even the fundamentals but
what he's telling me because I I I don't
have experience coding self what he's
telling me that without knowing all
those fundamentals and without being
able even to talk to AI kind of as a
developer to developer he wouldn't be as
efficient and he would be spending
magnitudes more time and he would still
need to go and do research and
understand like where the issue is. So
yeah, VIP coding is a cool thing, but
it's kind of it's not necessarily
marketing. Like I really like our
approach where we got ourselves a
developer in our team. And why did we
get it? Because with VIP coding, we can
just turn out things very very fast and
then we can show it to our product team
and they would say like to product team
to Demitri our CEO and he would say,
"Yeah, I like this idea. Let's kind of
productize it. Let's add it to HFS." So
yeah.
>> Yeah. Totally. I mean, you know, I abs I
I had the same experience, right? By
poke coding can be extremely frustrating
and you get to like 99% quickly and then
the last percent just takes, you know,
five times as much time as it took to
get to 90 99%. Um, so all of that is
true and I think there's some like
things that you can do to to kind of um
make it more efficient like first
creating a PRD with AI blah blah blah,
right? like designs, showing what good
looks like. There's a whole bunch of
stuff you can do to increase your
chances, but the reality is a developer
will always do a better job than a
marketer. And it's still the first time
that a marketer can create tools at all.
You know what I mean? Like before it was
always like, "Hey, please give us a
developer." No. Okay, then we can't do
this. Now that the house is on fire from
a traffic perspective, it's a perfect
time to to think more diligently and
intentful about this. And so I love that
you have a developer. I think that's the
right call. I think every company should
aim for that. Um, and again, um, these
little experiences can go way beyond
just a single landing page. You can
embed them in many pages. You can string
them together, right? That's another
thing that people forget. You can buy a
little suite of many apps across your
site. Um, and um, you know, become like
a like a more product um, focused uh,
marketing team. Um, do you want to go
into the third thing?
>> Uh, no. We actually don't have uh enough
time for this. So I will ask you a quick
question. Did you vape code something
that is kind of public that people can
go uh and check out?
>> Yeah. All the time, man. Like I'm I'm
you know putting my money where my mouth
is. So the um I'm writing this
newsletter called the growth memo and
all the I think for over the last couple
of weeks uh almost every growth memo
newsletter has um bycoded or like not
bipcoded tools at the very bottom. I
will say it's only for premium
subscribers. Um but yeah b you know like
an intent classifier tool that will
classify your questions and keywords by
user intent. Uh a topic um can like a a
key sorry a content cannibalization
identification tool. Uh
>> but no online tool that would be
available on your website for people to
just go and click around.
>> Um I mean if you're subscribed yes uh
there's like
>> only for paid subscribers.
>> Only for paid subscribers right now.
Yes.
>> Okay. Okay. Uh Kevin, uh it's been a
pleasure. Uh always great to catch up
with you and uh I'm looking forward to
seeing you in San Diego in October
because you're speaking at HFOL
conference. I'm looking forward to a
talk because we're recording this in
July. So it's like July, August,
September, October is like 4 months
until the event and who knows how much
stuff will happen in AI and search. So,
I'm sure you'll you'll come with some
fresh information for people. But yeah,
thanks for doing this.
>> Thank you. Been super excited about
this. Uh not disappointed in the
slightest and very very uh pumped up
about uh San Diego. So, I'll see you
there.
>> Thanks a lot for sticking till the very
end of this episode. I guess that means
you enjoyed it, right? Because if you
did, I have to ask you to subscribe to
this YouTube channel or maybe click the
follow button if you're listening to
this on Apple or Spotify. Not sure if
you know this, but subscriptions and
follows are the strongest signal for
these platforms to show this piece of
content to more people. So, I would
really, really appreciate it if you
would follow and subscribe. Thanks in
advance and I'll see you in the next
episode. Why?